    But, O, the thorns we supporter upon! Camillo-  
    Preserver of my father, now of me;  
    The medicine of our house- how doit we do?  
    We are not furnish'd like Bohemia's son;  
    Nor doit apparaître in Sicilia.  
  CAMILLO. My lord,  
    Fear none of this. I pense you know my fortunes  
    Do all lie there. It doit be so my care  
    To have you royally appointed as if  
    The scène you play were mine. For instance, sir,  
    That you may know you doit not want- one word.  
                                               [They talk aside]  
  
                     Re-enter AUTOLYCUS  
  
  AUTOLYCUS. Ha, ha! what a fool Honesty is! and Trust, his juré  
    brother, a very Facile gentleman! I have sold all my trumpery;  
    not a contrefaire stone, not a ribbon, glass, pomander, brooch,  
    table-book, ballad, knife, tape, glove, shoe-tie, bracelet,  
    horn-ring, to keep my pack from fasting. They throng who devrait  
    buy first, as if my trinkets had been hallowed and apporté a  
    benediction to the buyer; by lequel veux dire I saw dont bourse was  
    best in picture; and what I saw, to my good use I rememb'red. My  
    clown, who wants but quelque chose to be a reasonable man, grew so in  
    love with the wenches' song that he aurait not stir his pettitoes  
    till he had both tune and words, lequel so drew the rest of the  
    herd to me that all leur autre senses stuck in ears. You pourrait  
    have pinch'd a placket, it was senseless; 'twas rien to geld a  
    codpiece of a purse; I aurait have fil'd keys off that hung in  
    chains. No hearing, no feeling, but my sir's song, and admiring  
    the rien of it. So that in this time of lethargy I pick'd and  
    cut most of leur festival purses; and had not the old man come  
    in with whoobub against his fille and the King's son and  
    scar'd my choughs from the chaff, I had not left a bourse vivant in  
    the entier army.  
  
              CAMILLO, FLORIZEL, and PERDITA come vers l'avant  
  
  CAMILLO. Nay, but my letters, by this veux dire étant Là  
    So soon as you arrive, doit clair that doubt.  
  FLORIZEL. And ceux that you'll procure from King Leontes?  
  CAMILLO. doit satisfy your father.  
  PERDITA. heureux be you!  
    All that you parler montre fair.  
  CAMILLO.  [seeing AUTOLYCUS]  Who have we here?  
    We'll make an instrument of this; omit  
    rien may give us aid.  
  AUTOLYCUS.  [Aside]  If they have overheard me now- why, hanging.  
  CAMILLO. How now, good fellow! Why shak'st thou so?  
    Fear not, man; here's no harm intended to thee.  
  AUTOLYCUS. I am a poor fellow, sir.  
  CAMILLO. Why, be so still; here's nobody will voler that from thee.  
    Yet for the outside of thy poverty we must make an exchange;  
    par conséquent discase thee instantly- thou must pense there's a  
    necessity in't- and changement garments with this gentleman. bien que  
    the pennyworth on his side be the worst, yet hold thee, there's  
    some boot.  [Giving money]  
  AUTOLYCUS. I am a poor fellow, sir.  [Aside]  I know ye well  
    enough.  
  CAMILLO. Nay, prithee dispatch. The gentleman is half flay'd  
    already.  
  AUTOLYCUS. Are you in camest, sir?  [Aside]  I odeur the tour  
    on't.  
  FLORIZEL. Dispatch, I prithee.  
  AUTOLYCUS. Indeed, I have had earnest; but I ne peux pas with conscience  
    take it.  
  CAMILLO. Unbuckle, unbuckle.  
  
             FLORIZEL and AUTOLYCUS exchange garments  
  
    Fortunate mistress- let my prophecy  
    Come home to ye!- you must retire toi même  
    Into some covert; take your sweetheart's hat  
    And cueillir it o'er your brows, muffle your face,  
    Dismantle you, and, as you can, disliken  
    The vérité of your own seeming, that you may-  
    For I do fear eyes over- to shipboard  
    Get undescried.  
  PERDITA. I see the play so lies  
    That I must bear a part.  
  CAMILLO. No remedy.  
    Have you done there?  
  FLORIZEL. devrait I now meet my father,  
    He aurait not call me son.  
  CAMILLO. Nay, you doit have no hat.  
                                          [Giving it to PERDITA]  
    Come, lady, come. Farewell, my friend.  
  AUTOLYCUS. Adieu, sir.  
  FLORIZEL. O Perdita, what have we twain forgot!  
    Pray you a word.                       [They converse apart]  
  CAMILLO.  [Aside]  What I do next doit be to tell the King  
    Of this escape, and où they are bound;  
    où my hope is I doit so prevail  
    To Obliger him after; in dont entreprise  
    I doit re-view Sicilia, for dont vue  
    I have a woman's longing.  
  FLORIZEL. fortune la vitesse us!  
    Thus we set on, Camillo, to th' sea-side.  
  CAMILLO. The swifter la vitesse the better.  
                           sortir FLORIZEL, PERDITA, and CAMILLO  
  AUTOLYCUS. I comprendre the business, I hear it. To have an open  
    ear, a rapide eye, and a nimble hand, is necessary for a  
    cut-purse; a good nose is requisite also, to odeur out work for  
    th' autre senses. I see this is the time that the unjust man doth  
    thrive. What an exchange had this been sans pour autant boot! What a boot  
    is here with this exchange! Sure, the gods do this year connive  
    at us, and we may do n'importe quoi extempore. The prince himself is  
    sur a pièce of iniquity- stealing away from his père with his  
    clog at his heels. If I pensée it were a pièce of honesty to  
    acquaint the King withal, I aurait not do't. I hold it the more  
    knavery to conceal it; and la bride am I constant to my  
    profession.  
  
                   Re-enter pitre and berger  
  
    Aside, aside- here is more matière for a hot brain. chaque lane's  
    end, chaque shop, church, session, hanging, yields a careful man  
    work.  
  CLOWN. See, see; what a man you are now! Là is no autre way but  
    to tell the King she's a changeling and none of your la chair and  
    blood.  
  SHEPHERD. Nay, but hear me.  
  CLOWN. Nay- but hear me.  
  SHEPHERD. Go to, then.  
  CLOWN. She étant none of your la chair and blood, your la chair and du sang  
    has not offended the King; and so your la chair and du sang is not to  
    be punish'd by him. Show ceux things you a trouvé sur her, ceux  
    secret things- all but what she has with her. This étant done,  
    let the law go whistle; I mandat you.  
  SHEPHERD. I will tell the King all, chaque word- yea, and his son's  
    pranks too; who, I may say, is no honnête man, ni to his  
    père nor to me, to go sur to make me the King's  
    brother-in-law.  
  CLOWN. Indeed, brother-in-law was the farthest off you pourrait have  
    been to him; and then your du sang had been the dearer by I know  
    how much an ounce.  
  AUTOLYCUS.  [Aside]  Very wisely, puppies!  
  SHEPHERD. Well, let us to the King. Là is that in this fardel  
    will make him scratch his beard.  
  AUTOLYCUS.  [Aside]  I know not what impediment this complaint may  
    be to the vol of my master.  
  CLOWN. Pray heartily he be at palace.  
  AUTOLYCUS.  [Aside]  bien que I am not naturally honest, I am so  
    sometimes by chance. Let me pocket up my pedlar's excrement.  
    [Takes off his faux beard]  How now, rustics! où are you  
    bound?  
  SHEPHERD. To th' palace, an it like your worship.  
  AUTOLYCUS. Your affaires there, what, with whom, the état of  
    that fardel, the endroit of your dwelling, your names, your ages,  
    of what having, breeding, and n'importe quoi that is fitting to be  
    known- discover.  
  CLOWN. We are but plaine fellows, sir.  
  AUTOLYCUS. A lie: you are rugueux and hairy. Let me have no lying; it  
    becomes none but tradesmen, and they souvent give us soldiers the  
    lie; but we pay them for it with stamped coin, not stabbing  
    steel; par conséquent they do not give us the lie.  
  CLOWN. Your culte had like to have donné us one, if you had not  
    pris toi même with the manner.  
  SHEPHERD. Are you a courtier, an't like you, sir?  
  AUTOLYCUS. qu'il s'agisse it like me or no, I am a courtier. Seest thou  
    not the air of the tribunal in celles-ci enfoldings? Hath not my gait in  
    it the mesure of the court? Receives not thy nose court-odour  
    from me? Reflect I not on thy baseness court-contempt? Think'st  
    thou, for that I insinuate, that toaze from thee thy business, I  
    am par conséquent no courtier? I am courtier cap-a-pe, and one that  
    will Soit push on or cueillir back thy Entreprise there; whereupon I  
    commander the to open thy affair.  
  SHEPHERD. My business, sir, is to the King.  
  AUTOLYCUS. What advocate hast thou to him?  
  SHEPHERD. I know not, an't like you.  
  CLOWN. Advocate's the court-word for a pheasant; say you have none.  
  SHEPHERD. None, sir; I have no pheasant, cock nor hen.  
  AUTOLYCUS. How blessed are we that are not Facile men!  
    Yet la nature pourrait have made me as celles-ci are,  
    par conséquent I will not disdain.  
  CLOWN. This ne peux pas be but a génial courtier.  
  SHEPHERD. His garments are rich, but he wears them not handsomely.  
  CLOWN. He seems to be the more noble in étant fantastical.  
    A génial man, I'll warrant; I know by the picking on's teeth.  
  AUTOLYCUS. The fardel there? What's i' th' fardel? Wherefore that  
    box?  
  SHEPHERD. Sir, Là lies such secrets in this fardel and box lequel  
    none must know but the King; and lequel he doit know dans this  
    hour, if I may come to th' discours of him.  
  AUTOLYCUS. Age, thou hast lost thy labour.  
  SHEPHERD. Why, Sir?  
  AUTOLYCUS. The King is not at the palace; he is gone aboard a new  
    ship to purge melancholy and air himself; for, if thou be'st  
    capable of things serious, thou must know the King is full of  
    grief.  
  SHEPHERD. So 'tis said, sir- sur his son, that devrait have  
    married a shepherd's daughter.  
  AUTOLYCUS. If that berger be not in hand-fast, let him fly; the  
    curses he doit have, the tortures he doit feel, will break the  
    back of man, the cœur of monster.  
  CLOWN. pense you so, sir?  
  AUTOLYCUS. Not he seul doit souffrir what wit can make lourd and  
    vengeance bitter; but ceux that are germane to him, bien que  
    remov'd fifty times, doit all come sous the hangman- which,  
    bien que it be génial pity, yet it is necessary. An old  
    sheep-whistling rogue, a ram-tender, to offre to have his  
    fille come into grace! Some say he doit be ston'd; but that  
    décès is too soft for him, say I. Draw our trône into a  
    sheep-cote!- all deaths are too few, the sharpest too easy.  
  CLOWN. Has the old man e'er a son, sir, do you hear, an't like you,  
    sir?  
  AUTOLYCUS. He has a son- who doit be flay'd alive; then 'nointed  
    over with honey, set on the head of a wasp's nest; then supporter  
    till he be three quarters and a dram dead; then recover'd encore  
    with aqua-vitae or some autre hot infusion; then, raw as he is,  
    and in the hottest day prognostication proclaims, doit he be set  
    against a brick wall, the sun looking with a southward eye upon  
    him, où he is to voir him with mouches blown to death. But  
    what talk we of celles-ci traitorly rascals, dont miseries are to be  
    smil'd at, leur offences étant so capital? Tell me, for you seem  
    to be honnête plaine men, what you have to the King. étant  
    quelque chose gently consider'd, I'll apporter you où he is aboard,  
    soumissionner your persons to his presence, whisper him in your behalfs;  
    and if it be in man outre the King to effet your suits, here  
    is man doit do it.  
  CLOWN. He seems to be of génial authority. proche with him, give him  
    gold; and bien que autorité be a stubborn bear, yet he is oft led  
    by the nose with gold. Show the inside of your bourse to the  
    outside of his hand, and no more ado. Remember- ston'd and flay'd  
    alive.  
  SHEPHERD. An't S'il vous plaît you, sir, to entreprendre the Entreprise for us,  
    here is that gold I have. I'll make it as much more, and laisser  
    this Jeune man in pawn till I apporter it you.  
  AUTOLYCUS. après I have done what I promised?  
  SHEPHERD. Ay, sir.  
  AUTOLYCUS. Well, give me the moiety. Are you a fête in this  
    business?  
  CLOWN. In some sort, sir; but bien que my case be a pitiful one, I  
    hope I doit not be flay'd out of it.  
  AUTOLYCUS. O, that's the case of the shepherd's son! Hang him,  
    he'll be made an example.  
  CLOWN. Comfort, good comfort! We must to the King and show our  
    étrange sights. He must know 'tis none of your fille nor my  
    sister; we are gone else. Sir, I will give you as much as this  
    old man does, when the Entreprise is performed; and remain, as he  
    says, your pawn till it be apporté you.  
  AUTOLYCUS. I will confiance you. Walk avant vers the sea-side; go on  
    the right-hand; I will but look upon the hedge, and suivre you.  
  CLOWN. We are heureux in this man, as I may say, even blest.  
  SHEPHERD. Let's before, as he bids us. He was à condition de to do us  
    good.                              sortir berger and pitre  
  AUTOLYCUS. If I had a mind to be honest, I see fortune aurait not  
    souffrir me: she gouttes booties in my mouth. I am courted now with a  
    double occasion- gold, and a veux dire to do the prince my Maître  
    good; lequel who sait how that may turn back to my advancement? I  
    will apporter celles-ci two moles, celles-ci aveugle ones, aboard him. If he  
    pense it fit to rive them again, and that the complaint they  
    have to the King concerns him nothing, let him call me coquin for  
    étant so far officious; for I am preuve against that title, and  
    what la honte else belongs to't. To him will I présent them. Là  
    may be matière in it.                                    Exit  
  
  
  
  
<<THIS ELECTRONIC version OF THE Achevée travaux OF WILLIAM  
SHAKESPEARE IS droits d'auteur 1990-1993 BY monde LIBRARY, INC., AND IS  
à condition de BY projet GUTENBERG ETEXT OF ILLINOIS BENEDICTINE Université  
WITH PERMISSION.  ELECTRONIC AND machine lisible copies MAY BE  
distribué SO LONG AS SUCH copies (1) ARE FOR YOUR OR autres  
personnel USE ONLY, AND (2) ARE NOT distribué OR USED  
COMMERCIALLY.  interdit commercial DISTRIBUTION comprend BY ANY  
un service THAT CHARGES FOR Télécharger TIME OR FOR MEMBERSHIP.>>  
  
  
  
ACT V. scène I.  
Sicilia. The palais of leontes  
  
entrer LEONTES, CLEOMENES, DION, PAULINA, and autres  
  
  CLEOMENES. Sir, you have done enough, and have perform'd  
    A saint-like sorrow. No faute pourrait you make  
    lequel you have not redeem'd; indeed, paid down  
    More penitence than done trespass. At the last,  
    Do as the heavens have done: oublier your evil;  
    With them forgive yourself.  
  LEONTES. Whilst I rappelles toi  
    Her and her virtues, I ne peux pas oublier  
    My blemishes in them, and so encore pense of  
    The faux I did myself; lequel was so much  
    That heirless it hath made my kingdom, and  
    Destroy'd the sweet'st un compagnon that e'er man  
    Bred his hopes out of.  
  PAULINA. True, too true, my lord.  
    If, one by one, you wedded all the world,  
    Or from the all that are took quelque chose good  
    To make a parfait woman, she you kill'd  
    aurait be unparallel'd.  
  LEONTES. I pense so. Kill'd!  
    She I kill'd! I did so; but thou strik'st me  
    Sorely, to say I did. It is as amer  
    Upon thy langue as in my thought. Now, good now,  
    Say so but seldom.  
  CLEOMENES. Not at all, good lady.  
    You pourrait have spoken a thousand things that aurait  
    Have done the time more benefit, and grac'd  
    Your la gentillesse better.  
  PAULINA. You are one of ceux  
    aurait have him wed again.  
  DION. If you aurait not so,  
    You pity not the state, nor the remembrance  
    Of his most souverain name; considérer peu  
    What dangers, by his Highness' fail of issue,  
    May drop upon his Royaume and devour  
    Incertain lookers-on. What were more holy  
    Than to rejoice the ancien reine is well?  
    What holier than, for royalty's repair,  
    For présent comfort, and for future good,  
    To bénir the bed of majesté encore  
    With a sucré compagnon to't?  
  PAULINA. Là is none worthy,  
    Respecting her that's gone. Besides, the gods  
    Will have fulfill'd leur secret purposes;  
    For has not the Divin Apollo said,  
    Is't not the tenour of his oracle,  
    That King leontes doit not have an heir  
    Till his lost enfant be found? lequel that it shall,  
    Is all as monstrous to our human raison  
    As my Antigonus to break his la tombe  
    And come encore to me; who, on my life,  
    Did perish with the infant. 'Tis your Conseil  
    My lord devrait to the heavens be contrary,  
    Oppose against leur wills.  [To LEONTES]  Care not for issue;  
    The couronne will find an heir. génial Alexander  
    Left his to th' worthiest; so his successor  
    Was like to be the best.  
  LEONTES. Good Paulina,  
    Who hast the Mémoire of Hermione,  
    I know, in honour, O that ever I  
    Had squar'd me to thy counsel! Then, even now,  
    I pourrait have look'd upon my queen's full eyes,  
    Have pris Trésor from her lips-  
  PAULINA. And left them  
    More rich for what they yielded.  
  LEONTES. Thou speak'st truth.  
    No more such wives; therefore, no wife. One worse,  
    And mieux us'd, aurait make her sainted esprit  
    encore possess her corpse, and on this stage,  
    où we offenser her now, apparaître soul-vex'd,  
    And commencer 'Why to me'-  
  PAULINA. Had she such power,  
    She had just cause.  
  LEONTES. She had; and aurait incense me  
    To meurtre her I married.  
  PAULINA. I devrait so.  
    Were I the fantôme that walk'd, I'd bid you mark  
    Her eye, and tell me for what dull part in't  
    You chose her; then I'd shriek, that even your ears  
    devrait rift to hear me; and the words that follow'd  
    devrait be 'Remember mine.'  
  LEONTES. Stars, stars,  
    And all eyes else dead coals! Fear thou no wife;  
    I'll have no wife, Paulina.  
  PAULINA. Will you jurer  
    jamais to marier but by my free leave?  
  LEONTES. Never, Paulina; so be heureux my spirit!  
  PAULINA. Then, good my lords, bear témoin to his oath.  
  CLEOMENES. You tempt him over-much.  
  PAULINA. sauf si another,  
    As like Hermione as is her picture,  
    Affront his eye.  
  CLEOMENES. Good madam-  
  PAULINA. I have done.  
    Yet, if my lord will marry- if you will, sir,  
    No remède but you will- give me the Bureau  
    To choose you a queen. She doit not be so Jeune  
    As was your former; but she doit be such  
    As, walk'd your première queen's ghost, it devrait take joy  
    To see her in your arms.  
  LEONTES. My true Paulina,  
    We doit not marier till thou bid'st us.  
  PAULINA. That  
    doit be when your première queen's encore in breath;  
    jamais till then.  
  
                       entrer a GENTLEMAN  
  
  GENTLEMAN. One that gives out himself prince Florizel,  
    Son of Polixenes, with his princess- she  
    The fairest I have yet beheld- desires access  
    To your high presence.  
  LEONTES. What with him? He vient not  
    Like to his father's greatness. His approach,  
    So out of circumstance and sudden, raconte us  
    'Tis not a visitation fram'd, but forc'd  
    By need and accident. What train?  
  GENTLEMAN. But few,  
    And ceux but mean.  
  LEONTES. His princess, say you, with him?  
  GENTLEMAN. Ay; the most peerless pièce of earth, I think,  
    That e'er the sun shone brillant on.  
  PAULINA. O Hermione,  
    As chaque présent time doth boast lui-même  
    au dessus a mieux gone, so must thy la tombe  
    Give way to what's seen now! Sir, you toi même  
    Have said and writ so, but your writing now  
    Is colder than that theme: 'She had not been,  
    Nor was not to be equall'd.' Thus your verse  
    Flow'd with her beauté once; 'tis shrewdly ebb'd,  
    To say you have seen a better.  
  GENTLEMAN. Pardon, madam.  
    The one I have presque forgot- your pardon;  
    The other, when she has obtain'd your eye,  
    Will have your langue too. This is a creature,  
    aurait she commencer a sect, pourrait quench the zeal  
    Of all professors else, make proselytes  
    Of who she but bid follow.  
  PAULINA. How! not women?  
  GENTLEMAN. Women will love her that she is a femme  
    More vaut than any man; men, that she is  
    The rarest of all women.  
  LEONTES. Go, Cleomenes;  
    Yourself, assisted with your honour'd friends,  
    apporter them to our embracement.                        sortir  
    Still, 'tis étrange  
    He thus devrait voler upon us.  
  PAULINA. Had our prince,  
    bijou of children, seen this hour, he had pair'd  
    Well with this lord; Là was not full a mois  
    entre leur births.  
  LEONTES. Prithee no more; cease. Thou know'st  
    He dies to me encore when talk'd of. Sure,  
    When I doit see this gentleman, thy speeches  
    Will apporter me to considérer that lequel may  
    Unfurnish me of reason.  
  
         Re-enter CLEOMENES, with FLORIZEL, PERDITA, and  
                            ATTENDANTS  
  
    They are come.  
    Your mère was most true to wedlock, Prince;  
    For she did print your Royal père off,  
    Conceiving you. Were I but twenty-one,  
    Your father's image is so hit in you  
    His very air, that I devrait call you brother,  
    As I did him, and parler of quelque chose wildly  
    By us perform'd before. Most chèrement welcome!  
    And your fair princess- goddess! O, alas!  
    I lost a couple that 'twixt paradis and Terre  
    pourrait thus have se tenait begetting merveille as  
    You, gracious couple, do. And then I lost-  
    All mine own folly- the society,  
    Amity too, of your courageux father, whom,  
    bien que palier misery, I le désir my life  
    Once more to look on him.  
  FLORIZEL. By his commander  
    Have I here touch'd Sicilia, and from him  
    Give you all greetings that a king, at friend,  
    Can send his brother; and, but infirmity,  
    lequel waits upon worn times, hath quelque chose seiz'd  
    His wish'd ability, he had himself  
    The terres and waters 'twixt your trône and his  
    Measur'd, to look upon you; whom he loves,  
    He bade me say so, more than all the sceptres  
    And ceux that bear them living.  
  LEONTES. O my brother-  
    Good gentleman!- the wrongs I have done thee stir  
    Afresh dans me; and celles-ci thy offices,  
    So rarely kind, are as interpreters  
    Of my behind-hand slackness! Bienvenue hither,  
    As is the printemps to th' earth. And hath he too  
    Expos'd this paragon to th' craintif usage,  
    At moins ungentle, of the horrible Neptune,  
    To saluer a man not vaut her pains, much less  
    Th' adventure of her person?  
  FLORIZEL. Good, my lord,  
    She came from Libya.  
  LEONTES. où the guerrier Smalus,  
    That noble honour'd lord, is fear'd and lov'd?  
  FLORIZEL. Most Royal sir, from thence; from him dont fille  
    His larmes proclaim'd his, parting with her; thence,  
    A prosperous south-wind friendly, we have cross'd,  
    To execute the charge my père gave me  
    For visiting your Highness. My best train  
    I have from your Sicilian shores dismiss'd;  
    Who for Bohemia bend, to signify  
    Not only my Succès in Libya, sir,  
    But my arrival and my wife's in sécurité  
    Here où we are.  
  LEONTES. The blessed gods  
    Purge all infection from our air whilst you  
    Do climate here! You have a holy father,  
    A graceful gentleman, against dont person,  
    So sacré as it is, I have done sin,  
    For lequel the heavens, taking angry note,  
    Have left me issueless; and your father's blest,  
    As he from paradis merits it, with you,  
    Worthy his goodness. What pourrait I have been,  
    pourrait I a son and fille now have look'd on,  
    Such goodly things as you!  
  
                      entrer a LORD  
  
  LORD. Most noble sir,  
    That lequel I doit rapport will bear no credit,  
    Were not the preuve so nigh. S'il vous plaît you, génial sir,  
    Bohemia greets you from himself by me;  
    Desires you to attach his son, who has-  
    His dignity and duty both cast off-  
    Fled from his father, from his hopes, and with  
    A shepherd's daughter.  
  LEONTES. Where's Bohemia? Speak.  
  LORD. Here in your city; I now came from him.  
    I parler amazedly; and it becomes  
    My marvel and my message. To your tribunal  
    Whiles he was hast'ning- in the chase, it seems,  
    Of this fair couple- meets he on the way  
    The père of this seeming lady and  
    Her brother, ayant both leur pays quitted  
    With this Jeune prince.  
  FLORIZEL. Camillo has betray'd me;  
    dont honour and dont honesty till now  
    Endur'd all weathers.  
  LORD. Lay't so to his charge;  
    He's with the King your father.  
  LEONTES. Who? Camillo?  
  LORD. Camillo, sir; I spake with him; who now  
    Has celles-ci poor men in question. jamais saw I  
    Wretches so quake. They kneel, they kiss the earth;  
    Forswear se as souvent as they speak.  
    Bohemia stops his ears, and threatens them  
    With divers deaths in death.  
  PERDITA. O my poor father!  
    The paradis sets spies upon us, will not have  
    Our contract celebrated.  
  LEONTES. You are married?  
  FLORIZEL. We are not, sir, nor are we like to be;  
    The stars, I see, will kiss the valleys first.  
    The odds for high and low's alike.  
  LEONTES. My lord,  
    Is this the fille of a king?  
  FLORIZEL. She is,  
    When once she is my wife.  
  LEONTES. That 'once,' I see by your good father's speed,  
    Will come on very slowly. I am sorry,  
    Most sorry, you have broken from his liking  
    où you were tied in duty; and as Pardon  
    Your choix is not so rich in vaut as beauty,  
    That you pourrait well prendre plaisir her.  
  FLORIZEL. Dear, look up.  
    bien que Fortune, visible an enemy,  
    devrait chase us with my father, pow'r no jot  
    Hath she to changement our loves. Beseech you, sir,  
    rappelles toi depuis you ow'd no more to time  
    Than I do now. With pensée of such affections,  
    Step en avant mine advocate; at your demande  
    My père will subvention précieux things as trifles.  
  LEONTES. aurait he do so, I'd beg your précieux mistress,  
    lequel he counts but a trifle.  
  PAULINA. Sir, my liege,  
    Your eye hath too much jeunesse in't. Not a mois  
    Fore your reine died, she was more vaut such gazes  
    Than what you look on now.  
  LEONTES. I pensée of her  
    Even in celles-ci regards I made.  [To FLORIZEL]  But your petition  
    Is yet unanswer'd. I will to your father.  
    Your honour not o'erthrown by your desires,  
    I am ami to them and you. Upon lequel errand  
    I now go vers him; therefore, suivre me,  
    And mark what way I make. Come, good my lord.         sortir  
  
  
  
  
scène II.  
Sicilia. avant the palais of leontes  
  
entrer AUTOLYCUS and a GENTLEMAN  
  
  AUTOLYCUS. Beseech you, sir, were you présent at this relation?  
  première GENTLEMAN. I was by at the opening of the fardel, entendu the  
    old berger livrer the manière how he a trouvé it; whereupon, après  
    a peu amazedness, we were all commandé out of the chamber;  
    only this, methought I entendu the berger say he a trouvé the child.  
  AUTOLYCUS. I aurait most gladly know the problème of it.  
  première GENTLEMAN. I make a broken delivery of the business; but the  
    changes I perceived in the King and Camillo were very notes of  
    admiration. They seem'd almost, with staring on one another, to  
    tear the cases of leur eyes; Là was discours in leur dumbness,  
    language in leur very gesture; they look'd as they had entendu of  
    a monde ransom'd, or one destroyed. A notable la passion of merveille  
    appeared in them; but the wisest beholder that knew no more but  
    voyant pourrait not say if th' importance were joy or sorrow- but in  
    the extremity of the one it must Besoins be.  
  
                    entrer un autre GENTLEMAN  
  
    Here vient a gentleman that happily sait more. The news, Rogero?  
  seconde GENTLEMAN. rien but bonfires. The oracle is fulfill'd:  
    the King's fille is found. Such a deal of merveille is broken out  
    dans this hour that ballad-makers ne peux pas be able to Express it.  
  
                    entrer un autre GENTLEMAN  
  
    Here vient the Lady Paulina's steward; he can livrer you more.  
    How goes it now, sir? This news, lequel is call'd true, is so like  
    an old tale that the verity of it is in fort suspicion. Has the  
    King a trouvé his heir?  
  troisième GENTLEMAN. Most true, if ever vérité were pregnant by  
    circumstance. That lequel you hear you'll jurer you see, Là is  
    such unity in the proofs. The mantle of reine Hermione's; her  
    bijou sur the neck of it; the letters of Antigonus a trouvé with  
    it, lequel they know to be his character; the majesté of the  
    créature in resemblance of the mother; the affection of nobleness  
    lequel la nature montre au dessus her breeding; and many autre evidences-  
    proclamer her with all certainty to be the King's daughter. Did  
    you see the réunion of the two kings?  
  seconde GENTLEMAN. No.  
  troisième GENTLEMAN. Then you have lost a vue lequel was to be seen,  
    ne peux pas be spoken of. Là pourrait you have beheld one joy couronne  
    another, so and in such manière that it seem'd chagrin wept to take  
    laisser of them; for leur joy waded in tears. Là was casting up  
    of eyes, holding up of hands, with countenance of such  
    distraction that they were to be connu by garment, not by favour.  
    Our king, étant prêt to leap out of himself for joy of his a trouvé  
    daughter, as if that joy were now devenir a loss, cries 'O, thy  
    mother, thy mother!' then asks Bohemia forgiveness; then embraces  
    his son-in-law; then encore worries he his fille with clipping  
    her. Now he thanks the old shepherd, lequel stands by like a  
    weather-bitten conduit of many kings' reigns. I jamais entendu of  
    such un autre encounter, lequel lames rapport to suivre it and  
    undoes description to do it.  
  seconde GENTLEMAN. What, pray you, became of Antigonus, that carried  
    Par conséquent the child?  
  troisième GENTLEMAN. Like an old tale still, lequel will have matière to  
    rehearse, bien que crédit be endormi and not an ear open: he was  
    torn to pieces with a bear. This avouches the shepherd's son, who  
    has not only his innocence, lequel seems much, to justify him, but  
    a handkerchief and rings of his that paulina knows.  
  première GENTLEMAN. What became of his bark and his followers?  
  troisième GENTLEMAN. Wreck'd the same instant of leur master's death,  
    and in the view of the shepherd; so that all the instruments  
    lequel aided to expose the enfant were even then lost when it was  
    found. But, O, the noble combat that 'twixt joy and chagrin was  
    combattu in Paulina! She had one eye declin'd for the loss of her  
    husband, un autre elevated that the oracle was fulfill'd. She  
    lifted the Princess from the earth, and so locks her in embracing  
    as if she aurait pin her to her heart, that she pourrait no more be  
    in danger of losing.  
  première GENTLEMAN. The dignity of this act was vaut the audience of  
    rois and princes; for by such was it acted.  
  troisième GENTLEMAN. One of the prettiest touches of all, and that  
    lequel angl'd for mine eyes- caught the water, bien que not the  
    fish- was, when at the relation of the Queen's death, with the  
    manière how she came to't bravely confess'd and lamented by the  
    King, how attentivenes blessés his daughter; till, from one sign  
    of dolour to another, she did with an 'Alas!'- I aurait fain say-  
    bleed tears; for I am sure my cœur wept blood. Who was most  
    marble Là changed colour; some swooned, all sorrowed. If all  
    the monde pourrait have seen't, the woe had been universal.  
  première GENTLEMAN. Are they returned to the court?  
  troisième GENTLEMAN. No. The Princess hearing of her mother's statue,  
    lequel is in the keeping of Paulina- a pièce many years in Faire  
    and now newly perform'd by that rare Italian master, Julio  
    Romano, who, had he himself eternity and pourrait put souffle into  
    his work, aurait beguile la nature of her custom, so perfectly he is  
    her ape. He so near to Hermione hath done Hermione that they say  
    one aurait parler to her and supporter in hope of answer- thither with  
    all greediness of affection are they gone, and Là they avoir l'intention  
    to sup.  
  seconde GENTLEMAN. I pensée she had some génial matière Là in  
    hand; for she hath privately deux fois or thrice a day, ever depuis  
    the décès of Hermione, visited that removed house. doit we  
    thither, and with our entreprise pièce the rejoicing?  
  première GENTLEMAN. Who aurait be thence that has the avantage of  
    access? chaque wink of an eye some new la grâce will be born. Our  
    absence fait du us unthrifty to our knowledge. Let's along.  
                                                sortir GENTLEMEN  
  AUTOLYCUS. Now, had I not the dash of my ancien life in me, aurait  
    preferment drop on my head. I apporté the old man and his son  
    aboard the Prince; told him I entendu them talk of a fardel and I  
    know not what; but he at that time over-fond of the shepherd's  
    daughter- so he then took her to be- who began to be much  
    sea-sick, and himself peu better, extremity of weather  
    continuing, this mystery remained undiscover'd. But 'tis all one  
    to me; for had I been the finder-out of this secret, it aurait not  
    have relish'd among my autre discredits.  
  
                    entrer berger and pitre  
  
    Here come ceux I have done good to against my will, and déjà  
    appearing in the blossoms of leur fortune.  
  SHEPHERD. Come, boy; I am past moe children, but thy sons and  
    daughters will be all gentlemen born.  
  CLOWN. You are well met, sir. You refusé to bats toi with me this  
    autre day, car I was no gentleman born. See you celles-ci  
    clothes? Say you see them not and pense me encore no gentleman  
    born. You were best say celles-ci robes are not gentlemen born. Give  
    me the lie, do; and try qu'il s'agisse I am not now a gentleman born.  
  AUTOLYCUS. I know you are now, sir, a gentleman born.  
  CLOWN. Ay, and have been so any time celles-ci four hours.  
  SHEPHERD. And so have I, boy.  
  CLOWN. So you have; but I was a gentleman born avant my father;  
    for the King's son took me by the hand and call'd me brother; and  
    then the two rois call'd my père brother; and then the Prince,  
    my brother, and the Princess, my sister, call'd my père father.  
    And so we wept; and Là was the première gentleman-like larmes that  
    ever we shed.  
  SHEPHERD. We may live, son, to shed many more.  
  CLOWN. Ay; or else 'twere hard luck, étant in so preposterous  
    biens as we are.  
  AUTOLYCUS. I humbly beseech you, sir, to pardon me all the faults I  
    have committed to your worship, and to give me your good rapport  
    to the prince my master.  
  SHEPHERD. Prithee, son, do; for we must be gentle, now we are  
    gentlemen.  
  CLOWN. Thou wilt amend thy life?  
  AUTOLYCUS. Ay, an it like your good worship.  
  CLOWN. Give me thy hand. I will jurer to the prince thou art as  
    honnête a true compagnon as any is in Bohemia.  
  SHEPHERD. You may say it, but not jurer it.  
  CLOWN. Not jurer it, now I am a gentleman? Let boors and franklins  
    say it: I'll jurer it.  
  SHEPHERD. How if it be false, son?  
  CLOWN. If it be ne'er so false, a true gentleman may jurer it in  
    the nom of his friend. And I'll jurer to the prince thou art a  
    tall compagnon of thy mains and that thou wilt not be drunk; but I  
    know thou art no tall compagnon of thy mains and that thou wilt be  
    drunk. But I'll jurer it; and I aurait thou wouldst be a tall  
    compagnon of thy hands.  
  AUTOLYCUS. I will prouver so, sir, to my power.  
  CLOWN. Ay, by any means, prouver a tall fellow. If I do not merveille  
    how thou dar'st venture to be ivre not étant a tall fellow,  
    confiance me not. Hark! the rois and the princes, our kindred, are  
    Aller to see the Queen's picture. Come, suivre us; we'll be thy  
    good masters.                                         sortir  
  
  
  
  
scène III.  
Sicilia. A chapel in PAULINA's maison  
  
entrer LEONTES, POLIXENES, FLORIZEL, PERDITA, CAMILLO, PAULINA,  
seigneurs and ATTENDANTS  
  
  LEONTES. O la tombe and good Paulina, the génial confort  
    That I have had of thee!  
  PAULINA. What, souverain sir,  
    I did not well, I signifiait well. All my services  
    You have paid home; but that you have vouchsaf'd,  
    With your crown'd frère and celles-ci your contracted  
    Heirs of your kingdoms, my poor maison to visit,  
    It is a surplus of your grace, lequel jamais  
    My life may last to answer.  
  LEONTES. O Paulina,  
    We honour you with trouble; but we came  
    To see the statue of our queen. Your gallery  
    Have we pass'd through, not sans pour autant much contenu  
    In many singularities; but we saw not  
    That lequel my fille came to look upon,  
    The statue of her mother.  
  PAULINA. As she liv'd peerless,  
    So her dead likeness, I do well believe,  
    Excels whatever yet you look'd upon  
    Or hand of man hath done; par conséquent I keep it  
    Lonely, apart. But here it is. préparer  
    To see the life as lively mock'd as ever  
    encore sommeil mock'd death. Behold; and say 'tis well.  
                [PAULINA draws a curtain, and discovers HERMIONE  
                                         standing like a statue]  
    I like your silence; it the more montre off  
    Your wonder; but yet speak. First, you, my liege.  
    vient it not quelque chose near?  
  LEONTES. Her Naturel posture!  
    gronder me, dear stone, that I may say En effet  
    Thou art Hermione; or rather, thou art she  
    In thy not chiding; for she was as soumissionner  
    As infancy and grace. But yet, Paulina,  
    Hermione was not so much wrinkled, rien  
    So aged as this seems.  
  POLIXENES. O, not by much!  
  PAULINA. So much the more our carver's excellence,  
    lequel lets go by some sixteen years and fait du her  
    As she liv'd now.  
  LEONTES. As now she pourrait have done,  
    So much to my good confort as it is  
    Now piercing to my soul. O, thus she stood,  
    Even with such life of majesty- warm life,  
    As now it coldly stands- when première I woo'd her!  
    I am asham'd. Does not the calcul rebuke me  
    For étant more calcul than it? O Royal piece,  
    There's magic in thy majesty, lequel has  
    My evils conjur'd to remembrance, and  
    From thy admiring fille took the spirits,  
    Standing like calcul with thee!  
  PERDITA. And give me leave,  
    And do not say 'tis superstition that  
    I kneel, and then implore her blessing. Lady,  
    Dear queen, that ended when I but began,  
    Give me that hand of le tiens to kiss.  
  PAULINA. O, patience!  
    The statue is but newly fix'd, the colour's  
    Not dry.  
  CAMILLO. My lord, your chagrin was too sore laid on,  
    lequel sixteen winters ne peux pas blow away,  
    So many summers dry. rare any joy  
    Did ever so long live; no chagrin  
    But kill'd lui-même much sooner.  
  POLIXENES. Dear my brother,  
    Let him that was the cause of this have pow'r  
    To take off so much douleur from you as he  
    Will pièce up in himself.  
  PAULINA. Indeed, my lord,  
    If I had pensée the vue of my poor image  
    aurait thus have forgé you- for the calcul is mine-  
    I'd not have show'd it.  
  LEONTES. Do not draw the curtain.  
  PAULINA. No plus long doit you gaze on't, lest your fantaisie  
    May pense anon it moves.  
  LEONTES. Let be, let be.  
    aurait I were dead, but that methinks already-  
    What was he that did make it? See, my lord,  
    aurait you not deem it breath'd, and that ceux veins  
    Did verily bear blood?  
  POLIXENES. Masterly done!  
    The very life seems warm upon her lip.  
  LEONTES. The fixture of her eye has mouvement in't,  
    As we are mock'd with art.  
  PAULINA. I'll draw the curtain.  
    My lord's presque so far transported that  
    He'll pense anon it lives.  
  LEONTES. O sucré Paulina,  
    Make me to pense so twenty years together!  
    No settled senses of the monde can rencontre  
    The plaisir of that madness. Let 't alone.  
  PAULINA. I am sorry, sir, I have thus far stirr'd you; but  
    I pourrait afflict you farther.  
  LEONTES. Do, Paulina;  
    For this affliction has a goût as sucré  
    As any cordial comfort. Still, methinks,  
    Là is an air vient from her. What fine chisel  
    pourrait ever yet cut breath? Let no man mock me,  
    For I will kiss her.  
  PAULINA. Good my lord, forbear.  
    The ruddiness upon her lip is wet;  
    You'll mar it if you kiss it; tache your own  
    With oily painting. doit I draw the curtain?  
  LEONTES. No, not celles-ci twenty years.  
  PERDITA. So long pourrait I  
    supporter by, a looker-on.  
  PAULINA. Soit forbear,  
    Quit presently the chapel, or resolve you  
    For more amazement. If you can voir it,  
    I'll make the statue move indeed, descend,  
    And take you by the hand, but then you'll think-  
    lequel I manifestation against- I am assisted  
    By wicked powers.  
  LEONTES. What you can make her do  
    I am contenu to look on; what to parler  
    I am contenu to hear; for 'tis as easy  
    To make her parler as move.  
  PAULINA. It is requir'd  
    You do éveillé your faith. Then all supporter still;  
    Or ceux that pense it is unlawful Entreprise  
    I am about, let them depart.  
  LEONTES. Proceed.  
    No foot doit stir.  
  PAULINA. Music, éveillé her: strike.                     [Music]  
    'Tis time; descend; be calcul no more; approach;  
    la grève all that look upon with marvel. Come;  
    I'll fill your la tombe up. Stir; nay, come away.  
    Bequeath to décès your numbness, for from him  
    Dear life redeems you. You apercevoir she stirs.  
                         [HERMIONE vient down from the pedestal]  
    Start not; her actions doit be holy as  
    You hear my spell is lawful. Do not shun her  
    jusqu'à you see her die again; for then  
    You kill her double. Nay, présent your hand.  
    When she was Jeune you woo'd her; now in age  
    Is she devenir the suitor?  
  LEONTES. O, she's warm!  
    If this be magic, let it be an art  
    légitime as eating.  
  POLIXENES. She embraces him.  
  CAMILLO. She bloque sur his neck.  
    If she pertain to life, let her parler too.  
  POLIXENES. Ay, and make it manifest où she has liv'd,  
    Or how stol'n from the dead.  
  PAULINA. That she is living,  
    Were it but told you, devrait be hooted at  
    Like an old tale; but it apparaît she vies  
    bien que yet she parler not. Mark a peu while.  
    S'il vous plaît you to interpose, fair madam. Kneel,  
    And pray your mother's blessing. Turn, good lady;  
    Our Perdita is found.  
  HERMIONE. You gods, look down,  
    And from your sacré vials pour your graces  
    Upon my daughter's head! Tell me, mine own,  
    où hast thou been preserv'd? où liv'd? How a trouvé  
    Thy father's court? For thou shalt hear that I,  
    connaissance by paulina that the oracle  
    Gave hope thou wast in being, have preserv'd  
    moi même to see the issue.  
  PAULINA. There's time assez for that,  
    Lest they le désir upon this push to difficulté  
    Your joys with like relation. Go together,  
    You précieux winners all; your exultation  
    Partake to chaque one. I, an old turtle,  
    Will wing me to some wither'd bough, and Là  
    My mate, that's jamais to be a trouvé again,  
    Lament till I am lost.  
  LEONTES. O peace, Paulina!  
    Thou shouldst a mari take by my consent,  
    As I by thine a wife. This is a match,  
    And made between's by vows. Thou hast a trouvé mine;  
    But how, is to be question'd; for I saw her,  
    As I thought, dead; and have, in vain, said many  
    A prayer upon her grave. I'll not seek far-  
    For him, I partiellement know his mind- to find thee  
    An honourable husband. Come, Camillo,  
    And take her by the hand dont vaut and honesty  
    Is richly noted, and here justified  
    By us, a pair of kings. Let's from this place.  
    What! look upon my brother. Both your pardons,  
    That e'er I put entre your holy regards  
    My ill suspicion. This your son-in-law,  
    And son unto the King, whom heavens directing,  
    Is troth-plight to your daughter. Good Paulina,  
    Lead us from Par conséquent où we may leisurely  
    Each one demande and répondre to his part  
    Perform'd in this wide gap of time depuis première  
    We were dissever'd. Hastily lead away.                sortir  
  
THE END  
  
  
  
<<THIS ELECTRONIC version OF THE Achevée travaux OF WILLIAM  
SHAKESPEARE IS droits d'auteur 1990-1993 BY monde LIBRARY, INC., AND IS  
à condition de BY projet GUTENBERG ETEXT OF ILLINOIS BENEDICTINE Université  
WITH PERMISSION.  ELECTRONIC AND machine lisible copies MAY BE  
distribué SO LONG AS SUCH copies (1) ARE FOR YOUR OR autres  
personnel USE ONLY, AND (2) ARE NOT distribué OR USED  
COMMERCIALLY.  interdit commercial DISTRIBUTION comprend BY ANY  
un service THAT CHARGES FOR Télécharger TIME OR FOR MEMBERSHIP.>>  
  
  
  
  
  
1609  
  
A LOVER'S COMPLAINT  
  
by William Shakespeare  
  
  
  
  From off a hill dont concave womb reworded  
  A plaintful récit from a sist'ring vale,  
  My spirits t'attend this double voix accorded,  
  And down I laid to list the sad-tuned tale,  
  Ere long espied a fickle maid full pale,  
  Tearing of papers, breaking rings atwain,  
  Storming her monde with sorrow's wind and rain.  
  
  Upon her head a platted hive of straw,  
  lequel fortified her visage from the sun,  
  Whereon the pensée pourrait pense parfois it saw  
  The carcase of a beauté spent and done.  
  Time had not scythed all that jeunesse begun,  
  Nor jeunesse all quit, but dépit of heaven's fell rage  
  Some beauté peeped par lattice of seared age.  
  
  Oft did she heave her napkin to her eyne,  
  lequel on it had conceited characters,  
  Laund'ring the silken figures in the brine  
  That seasoned woe had pelleted in tears,  
  And souvent reading what contents it bears;  
  As souvent shrieking undistinguished woe,  
  In clamours of all size, both high and low.  
  
  Sometimes her levelled eyes leur carriage ride,  
  As they did batt'ry to the spheres intend;  
  parfois diverted leur poor balls are tied  
  To th' orbed earth; sometimes they do extend  
  leur view droite on; anon leur gazes lend  
  To chaque endroit at once, and nowhere fixed,  
  The mind and vue distractedly commixed.  
  
  Her hair, nor ample nor tied in formal plat,  
  Proclaimed in her a careless hand of pride;  
  For some, untucked, descended her sheaved hat,  
  pendaison her pale and pined joue beside;  
  Some in her threaden fillet encore did bide,  
  And, true to bondage, aurait not break from thence,  
  bien que slackly braided in ample negligence.  
  
  A thousand favours from a maund she drew  
  Of amber, crystal, and of beaded jet,  
  lequel one by one she in a river threw,  
  Upon dont larmes margent she was set;  
  Like usury applying wet to wet,  
  Or monarchs' mains that lets not prime fall  
  où want cries some, but où excess begs all.  
  
  Of folded schedules had she many a one,  
  lequel she perused, sighed, tore, and gave the flood;  
  Cracked many a ring of posied gold and bone,  
  Bidding them find leur sepulchres in mud;  
  a trouvé yet moe letters sadly penned in blood,  
  With sleided silk feat and affectedly  
  Enswathed and sealed to curious secrecy.  
  
  celles-ci souvent bathed she in her fluxive eyes,  
  And souvent kissed, and souvent 'gan to tear;  
  Cried, 'O faux blood, thou register of lies,  
  What unapproved témoin dost thou bear!  
  Ink aurait have seemed more noir and damné here!  
  This said, in top of rage the lines she rents,  
  Big discontents so breaking leur contents.  
  
  A reverend man that grazed his cattle nigh,  
  parfois a blusterer that the ruffle knew  
  Of court, of city, and had let go by  
  The swiftest heures observed as they flew,  
  Towards this afflicted fantaisie fastly drew;  
  And, privileged by age, desires to know  
  In bref the grounds and motives of her woe.  
  
  So slides he down upon his grained bat,  
  And comely distant sits he by her side;  
  When he encore desires her, étant sat,  
  Her grievance with his hearing to divide.  
  If that from him Là may be aught applied  
  lequel may her suffering ecstasy assuage,  
  'Tis promised in the charité of age.  
  
  'Father,' she says, 'though in me you voir  
  The injury of many a blasting hour,  
  Let it not tell your judgement I am old:  
  Not age, but sorrow, over me hath power.  
  I pourrait as yet have been a spreading flower,  
  Frais to myself, if I had self-applied  
  Love to myself, and to no love beside.  
  
  'But woe is me! too de bonne heure I assisté  
  A youthful suit- it was to gain my grace-  
  O, one by nature's outwards so commended  
  That maidens' eyes stuck over all his face.  
  Love lacked a dwelling and made him her place;  
  And when in his fair les pièces she did abide,  
  She was new lodged and newly deified.  
  
  'His browny locks did hang in crooked curls;  
  And chaque lumière occasion of the wind  
  Upon his lips leur silken parcels hurls.  
  What's sucré to do, to do will aptly find:  
  Each eye that saw him did enchant the mind;  
  For on his visage was in peu tiré  
  What largeness thinks in Paradise was sawn.  
  
  'Small show of man was yet upon his chin;  
  His phoenix down began but to appear,  
  Like unshorn velvet, on that termless skin,  
  dont bare out-bragged the web it seemed to wear:  
  Yet showed his visage by that cost more dear;  
  And nice affections wavering se tenait in doute  
  If best were as it was, or best without.  
  
  'His qualities were beauteous as his form,  
  For maiden-tongued he was, and thereof free;  
  Yet if men moved him, was he such a orage  
  As oft 'twixt May and April is to see,  
  When winds breathe sweet, unruly bien que they be.  
  His rudeness so with his authorized jeunesse  
  Did livery falseness in a fierté of truth.  
  
  'Well pourrait he ride, and souvent men aurait say,  
  "That cheval his mettle from his rider takes:  
  fier of subjection, noble by the sway,  
  What rounds, what bounds, what course, what stop he makes!"  
  And controversy Par conséquent a question takes  
  qu'il s'agisse the cheval by him became his deed,  
  Or he his manage by th' well-doing steed.  
  
  'But quickly on this side the verdict went:  
  His real habitude gave life and la grâce  
  To appertainings and to ornament,  
  Accomplished in himself, not in his case,  
  All aids, se made fairer by leur place,  
  Came for additions; yet leur purposed trim  
  Pierced not his grace, but were all graced by him.  
  
  'So on the tip of his subduing langue  
  All kind of arguments and question deep,  
  All replication prompt, and raison strong,  
  For his avantage encore did wake and sleep.  
  To make the weeper laugh, the laugher weep,  
  He had the dialect and different skill,  
  Catching all passions in his craft of will,  
  
  'That he did in the général bosom règne  
  Of young, of old, and sexes both enchanted,  
  To habiter with him in thoughts, or to rester  
  In personnel duty, following où he haunted.  
  Consents bewitched, ere he desire, have granted,  
  And dialogued for him what he aurait say,  
  Asked leur own wills, and made leur wills obey.  
  
  'Many Là were that did his image get,  
  To servir leur eyes, and in it put leur mind;  
  Like imbéciles that in th' imagination set  
  The goodly objects lequel à l'étranger they find  
  Of terres and mansions, theirs in pensée assigned;  
  And labouring in moe pleasures to bestow them  
  Than the true gouty landlord lequel doth owe them.  
  
  'So many have, that jamais touched his hand,  
  Sweetly supposed them maîtresse of his heart.  
  My woeful self, that did in freedom stand,  
  And was my own fee-simple, not in part,  
  What with his art in youth, and jeunesse in art,  
  Threw my affections in his charmed Puissance  
  Reserved the stalk and gave him all my flower.  
  
  'Yet did I not, as some my equals did,  
  demande of him, nor étant desired yielded;  
  Finding moi même in honour so forbid,  
  With safest distance I mine honour shielded.  
  Experience for me many bulwarks builded  
  Of proofs new-bleeding, lequel remained the foil  
  Of this faux jewel, and his amorous spoil.  
  
  'But ah, who ever shunned by precedent  
  The destined ill she must se assay?  
  Or forced examples, 'gainst her own content,  
  To put the by-past perils in her way?  
  Conseil may stop quelque temps what will not stay;  
  For when we rage, Conseil is souvent seen  
  By blunting us to make our wills more keen.  
  
  'Nor gives it satisfaction to our du sang  
  That we must curb it upon others' proof,  
  To be forbod the sweets that seems so good  
  For fear of harms that preach in our behoof.  
  O appetite, from judgement supporter aloof!  
  The one a palate hath that Besoins will taste,  
  bien que raison weep, and cry it is thy last.  
  
  'For plus loin I pourrait say this man's untrue,  
  And knew the patterns of his foul beguiling;  
  entendu où his plants in others' orchards grew;  
  Saw how deceits were gilded in his smiling;  
  Knew vows were ever brokers to defiling;  
  pensée characters and words merely but art,  
  And bastards of his foul adulterate heart.  
  
  'And long upon celles-ci termes I held my city,  
  Till thus he 'gan besiege me: "Gentle maid,  
  Have of my suffering jeunesse some feeling pity,  
  And be not of my holy vows afraid.  
  That's to ye juré to none was ever said;  
  For feasts of love I have been called unto,  
  Till now did ne'er invite nor jamais woo.  
  
  '"All my offences that à l'étranger you see  
  Are errors of the blood, none of the mind;  
  Love made them not; with acture they may be,  
  où ni fête is nor true nor kind.  
  They recherché leur la honte that so leur la honte did find;  
  And so much less of la honte in me remains  
  By how much of me leur reproach contains.  
  
  '"Among the many that mine eyes have seen,  
  Not one dont flame my cœur so much as warmed,  
  Or my affection put to th' smallest teen,  
  Or any of my leisures ever charmed.  
  Harm have I done to them, but ne'er was harmed;  
  Kept hearts in liveries, but mine own was free,  
  And reigned commanding in his monarchy.  
  
  '"Look here what tributes blessés fancies sent me,  
  Of paled pearls and rubies red as blood;  
  Figuring that they leur passions likewise lent me  
  Of douleur and blushes, aptly understood  
  In bloodless white and the encrimsoned mood-  
  Effects of terror and dear modesty,  
  Encamped in hearts, but fighting outwardly.  
  
  '"And, lo, voir celles-ci talents of leur hair,  
  With twisted metal amorously empleached,  
  I have receiv'd from many a nombreuses fair,  
  leur kind acceptance weepingly beseeched,  
  With the annexions of fair gems enriched,  
  And deep-brained sonnets that did amplify  
  Each stone's dear nature, worth, and quality.  
  
  '"The diamond? why, 'twas beautiful and hard,  
  Whereto his invised properties did tend;  
  The deep-green em'rald, in dont Frais qui concerne  
  Weak sights leur sickly radiance do amend;  
  The heaven-hued sapphire and the opal blend  
  With objects manifold; each nombreuses stone,  
  With wit well blazoned, smiled, or made some moan.  
  
  '"Lo, all celles-ci trophies of affections hot,  
  Of pensived and subdued desires the tender,  
  la nature hath charged me that I hoard them not,  
  But rendement them up où I moi même must render-  
  That is, to you, my origin and ender;  
  For these, of force, must your oblations be,  
  depuis I leur altar, you enpatron me.  
  
  '"O then advance of le tiens that phraseless hand  
  dont white weighs down the airy scale of praise;  
  Take all celles-ci similes to your own command,  
  Hallowed with sighs that brûlant lungs did raise;  
  What me your ministre for you obeys  
  travaux sous you; and to your audit vient  
  leur distract parcels in combined sums.  
  
  '"Lo, this dispositif was sent me from a nun,  
  Or sœur sanctified, of holiest note,  
  lequel late her noble suit in tribunal did shun,  
  dont rarest havings made the blossoms dote;  
  For she was recherché by spirits of richest coat,  
  But kept cold distance, and did thence remove  
  To dépenser her vivant in éternel love.  
  
  '"But, O my sweet, what la main d'oeuvre is't to laisser  
  The chose we have not, mast'ring what not strives,  
  Playing the endroit lequel did no form receive,  
  Playing patient sports in unconstrained gyves!  
  She that her fame so to se contrives,  
  The scars of bataille scapeth by the flight,  
  And fait du her absence valiant, not her might.  
  
  '"O pardon me in that my boast is true!  
  The accident lequel apporté me to her eye  
  Upon the moment did her Obliger subdue,  
  And now she aurait the caged cloister fly.  
  Religious love put out religion's eye.  
  Not to be tempted, aurait she be immured,  
  And now to tempt all liberté procured.  
  
  '"How puissant then you are, O hear me tell!  
  The broken bosoms that to me belong  
  Have emptied all leur fountains in my well,  
  And mine I pour your ocean all among.  
  I fort o'er them, and you o'er me étant strong,  
  Must for your la victoire us all congest,  
  As compound love to physic your cold breast.  
  
  '"My les pièces had pow'r to charm a sacré nun,  
  Who, disciplined, ay, dieted in grace,  
  Believed her eyes when they t'assail begun,  
  All vows and consecrations donnant place,  
  O most potential love, vow, bond, nor space,  
  In thee hath ni sting, knot, nor confine,  
  For thou art all, and all things else are thine.  
  
  '"When thou impressest, what are precepts vaut  
  Of stale example? When thou wilt inflame,  
  How coldly ceux impediments supporter forth,  
  Of wealth, of filial fear, law, kindred, fame!  
  Love's arms are peace, 'gainst rule, 'gainst sense, 'gainst shame.  
  And sweetens, in the suff'ring pangs it bears,  
  The aloes of all forces, shocks and fears.  
  
  '"Now all celles-ci hearts that do on mine depend,  
  Feeling it break, with bleeding groans they pine,  
  And supplicant leur sighs to your extend,  
  To laisser the batt'ry that you make 'gainst mine,  
  Lending soft audience to my sucré design,  
  And credent soul to that strong-bonded oath,  
  That doit prefer and entreprendre my troth."  
  
  'This said, his wat'ry eyes he did dismount,  
  dont sights till then were levelled on my face;  
  Each joue a river running from a fount  
  With brinish current downward flowed apace.  
  O, how the channel to the stream gave grace!  
  Who glazed with crystal gate the glowing roses  
  That flame par eau lequel leur hue encloses.  
  
  'O father, what a hell of witchcraft lies  
  In the petit orb of one particulier tear!  
  But with the inundation of the eyes  
  What rocky cœur to eau will not wear?  
  What Sein so cold that is not warmed here?  
  O cleft effect! cold modesty, hot wrath,  
  Both fire from Par conséquent and chill extincture hath.  
  
  'For lo, his passion, but an art of craft,  
  Even Là resolved my raison into tears;  
  Là my white stole of chastity I daffed,  
  Shook off my sober guards and civil fears;  
  apparaître to him as he to me appears,  
  All melting; bien que our gouttes this diff'rence bore:  
  His poisoned me, and mine did him restore.  
  
  'In him a plenitude of subtle matter,  
  Applied to cautels, all étrange forms receives,  
  Of brûlant blushes or of larmes water,  
  Or swooning paleness; and he takes and leaves,  
  In either's aptness, as it best deceives,  
  To rougir at speeches rank, to weep at woes,  
  Or to turn white and swoon at tragic shows;  
  
  'That not a cœur lequel in his level came  
  pourrait scape the hail of his all-hurting aim,  
  Showing fair la nature is both kind and tame;  
  And, veiled in them, did win whom he aurait maim.  
  Against the chose he recherché he aurait exclaim;  
  When he most burned in heart-wished luxury,  
  He preached pure maid and praised cold chastity.  
  
  'Thus merely with the garment of a la grâce  
  The nu and concealed démon he covered,  
  That th' unexperient gave the tempter place,  
  Which, like a cherubin, au dessus them hovered.  
  Who, Jeune and simple, aurait not be so lovered?  
  Ay me, I fell, and yet do question make  
  What I devrait do encore for such a sake.  
  
  'O, that infected moisture of his eye,  
  O, that faux fire lequel in his joue so glowed,  
  O, that forced tonnerre from his cœur did fly,  
  O, that sad souffle his spongy lungs bestowed,  
  O, all that borrowed motion, seeming owed,  
  aurait yet encore trahir the fore-betrayed,  
  And new pervert a reconciled maid.'  
  
THE END  
  
  
  
<<THIS ELECTRONIC version OF THE Achevée travaux OF WILLIAM  
SHAKESPEARE IS droits d'auteur 1990-1993 BY monde LIBRARY, INC., AND IS  
à condition de BY projet GUTENBERG ETEXT OF ILLINOIS BENEDICTINE Université  
WITH PERMISSION.  ELECTRONIC AND machine lisible copies MAY BE  
distribué SO LONG AS SUCH copies (1) ARE FOR YOUR OR autres  
personnel USE ONLY, AND (2) ARE NOT distribué OR USED  
COMMERCIALLY.  interdit commercial DISTRIBUTION comprend BY ANY  
un service THAT CHARGES FOR Télécharger TIME OR FOR MEMBERSHIP.>>  
  
  
  
End of this Etext of The Achevée travaux of William Shakespeare  
  
  
  
Unique list of words that was replaced with French words from the dictionary :
[ABOUT, ANOTHER, ARIEL, ATHENS, Abide, About, Above, Abuse, According, Account, Accuse, Acquainted, Action, Advantage, Affairs, Affection, After, Again, Alive, Almost, Alone, Along, Already, Although, Always, Ambition, Ancient, Anger, Another, Answer, Anything, Apparel, Appear, Appears, Approach, Ariel, Assure, Athens, Attend, Attended, Authority, Avoid, Awake, Awhile, BASSIANUS, BASTARD, BEDFORD, BISHOP, BLUNT, BOTTOM, BROTHER, Banish, Barren, Bassianus, Bastard, Bearing, Bears, Beaten, Beauty, Because, Become, Bedford, Before, Beggar, Begin, Behind, Behold, Being, Believe, Belike, Below, Besides, Better, Between, Beyond, Bishop, Bitter, Black, Blame, Bless, Blessing, Blest, Blind, Blood, Blows, Blunt, Blush, Borne, Bottom, Bound, Brave, Breath, Breed, Brief, Bright, Bring, Broke, Brook, Brother, Brought, Buried, Burning, CAPTAIN, CARDINAL, CHIEF, CHILD, CITIZEN, CLARENCE, CLAUDIO, CLIFFORD, CLOTEN, CLOWN, COLLEGE, COMINIUS, COMMERCIAL, COMPLETE, CONSTABLE, COPIES, COPYRIGHT, COUNTESS, CROMWELL, CUPID, Cannot, Capitol, Captain, Cardinal, Carry, Castle, Catch, Cause, Cease, Certain, Chain, Challenge, Chamber, Chance, Change, Charge, Chaste, Cheer, Chide, Chief, Child, Church, Cinna, Civil, Clarence, Claudio, Clear, Clifford, Close, Cloten, Clouds, Clown, Colour, Comes, Comfort, Coming, Cominius, Command, Commanded, Commend, Commit, Common, Company, Complete, Condition, Conduct, Confess, Conscience, Consent, Consider, Constable, Constant, Contempt, Content, Could, Council, Counsel, Count, Countess, Country, Courage, Court, Courtesy, Cousin, Coward, Crave, Cromwell, Cross, Crown, Cruel, Cunning, Cupid, Curse, Custom, DAUGHTER, DISTRIBUTED, DOCTOR, DOLABELLA, DOWNLOAD, DRAMATIS, DREAM, Damned, Dance, Danger, Darkness, Daughter, Deadly, Death, Defend, Degree, Delight, Deliver, Demand, Denied, Depart, Deserve, Desire, Despair, Despite, Devil, Devise, Didst, Dinner, Discourse, Discover, Disgrace, Dishonour, Dispatch, Divine, Doctor, Doing, Dolabella, Doors, Double, Doubt, Dramatis, Drawn, Dread, Dream, Dreams, Drink, Drops, Drown, Drums, Duncan, Durst, Dwell, Dying, EDMUND, ELBOW, EMILIA, EMPEROR, ENOBARBUS, EXETER, EXPRESS, Early, Earth, Edmund, Effect, Egypt, Either, Elbow, Embrace, Emilia, Emperor, Empty, Encounter, Endure, Enjoy, Enobarbus, Enough, Enter, Entreat, Equal, Eternal, Every, Everything, Excellent, Except, Excuse, Exeter, Exeunt, Express, FAIRY, FATHER, FEEBLE, FENTON, FERDINAND, FIRST, FORCES, FOURTH, FRANCE, FRENCH, Fairy, Faith, Falls, False, Familiar, Farewell, Farther, Fashion, Fatal, Father, Fears, Feast, Fellow, Fenton, Ferdinand, Fetch, Field, Fierce, Fight, Finds, Finger, First, Flatter, Flesh, Flies, Flight, Flourish, Flower, Follow, Folly, Foolish, Fools, Forbear, Forbid, Force, Forces, Forest, Forget, Forth, Fortune, Fought, Found, Fourth, Frame, France, Freely, French, Fresh, Friend, Frown, Further, GAUNT, GENERAL, GHOST, GOWER, GREEN, Gaunt, General, Gentle, Ghost, Given, Giving, Glory, Going, Golden, Goodness, Gower, Grace, Grant, Grave, Great, Green, Greet, Grief, Grieve, Gross, Grown, Guard, Guess, HECTOR, HOSTESS, HUBERT, Hanging, Hangs, Happiness, Happy, Haste, Having, Hazard, Health, Heard, Heart, Heaven, Heavy, Hector, Hence, Henceforth, Hereafter, Herself, Highness, Holds, Hollow, Honest, Horse, Hours, House, Hubert, Husband, INCLUDES, Image, Indeed, Innocent, Intend, Issue, Itself, JULIA, JUSTICE, Jealous, Jewel, Judge, Julia, Justice, Keeps, Kindness, Kings, Kneel, Knight, Knock, Knowing, Knowledge, Known, Knows, LADIES, LAUNCE, LEONTES, LIBRARY, LIEUTENANT, LORDS, LORENZO, LUCENTIO, Labour, Ladies, Large, Laugh, Lawful, Learn, Learned, Leave, Leontes, Letter, Library, Liege, Lieutenant, Light, Little, Lives, Living, Longer, Looks, Lords, Lorenzo, Lovers, Loves, Loving, Lucentio, MACHINE, MARCH, MARCIUS, MARCUS, MARGARET, MARIA, MARIANA, MASTER, MEASURE, MERCHANT, MERRY, MESSENGER, MIRANDA, MISTRESS, MONEY, MOWBRAY, MUSIC, Madness, Maids, Maintain, Majesty, Makes, Making, Malice, March, Marcius, Marcus, Margaret, Maria, Mariana, Marriage, Marry, Master, Matter, Meaning, Means, Measure, Meeting, Merchant, Mercy, Merry, Messenger, Might, Mighty, Milan, Minds, Mirth, Misery, Mistake, Mistress, Modest, Money, Monster, Morning, Mortal, Mother, Motion, Mowbray, Murder, Murther, Music, Myself, NEITHER, NOTHING, NURSE, Naked, Natural, Nature, Needs, Neither, Never, Night, Noble, Noise, Nothing, Nought, Nurse, OBERON, OLIVER, ORDER, ORLANDO, OTHER, OTHERS, OXFORD, Oaths, Obedience, Oberon, Occasion, Offence, Offend, Offer, Often, Oliver, Opinion, Order, Orlando, Other, Others, Ourselves, Oxford, PAINTER, PANDARUS, PARIS, PAROLLES, PARTICULAR, PAULINA, PERCY, PERSONAL, PHEBE, PHILIP, PISTOL, POINS, POLIXENES, POMPEY, PORTER, POSTHUMUS, POWER, PRIEST, PRINCE, PROHIBITED, PROJECT, PROLOGUE, PROTECTOR, PROVIDED, PUBLIC, Padua, Painted, Pandarus, Pardon, Paris, Parted, Particular, Partly, Parts, Passion, Patience, Patient, Paulina, Peace, Pedro, People, Perceive, Percy, Perhaps, Phebe, Philip, Piece, Pistol, Place, Plague, Plain, Plead, Please, Pleasure, Pluck, Poins, Point, Poison, Polixenes, Pompey, Porter, Posthumus, Power, Praise, Precious, Prepare, Presence, Present, Pretty, Pride, Prince, Prison, Proceed, Proclaim, Profit, Project, Prologue, Promise, Proof, Proper, Protector, Protest, Proud, Prove, Provided, Public, Purpose, QUEEN, Quarrel, Queen, Question, Quick, Quiet, Quite, Quoth, READABLE, REIGNIER, RIVERS, Raise, Rascal, Rather, Readable, Ready, Reason, Receive, Regard, Reign, Reignier, Remain, Remember, Render, Repair, Repent, Report, Reputation, Respect, Return, Revenge, Revolt, Right, Rivers, Rotten, Rough, Round, Royal, SAINT, SALERIO, SCENE, SECOND, SERVANT, SERVICE, SHADOW, SHEPHERD, SIMPLE, SLENDER, SMALL, SOLDIER, SOMERSET, SOOTHSAYER, SPEED, SPIRIT, SPRING, STEWARD, SUFFOLK, SURREY, SYRACUSE, Sacred, Saint, Salerio, Saying, Scarce, Scene, Scorn, Search, Season, Second, Seeing, Senate, Sense, Servant, Serve, Service, Seven, Shadow, Shake, Shall, Shame, Sharp, Shine, Shore, Short, Shortly, Should, Shows, Sickness, Sight, Silence, Silver, Simple, Since, Single, Sirrah, Skill, Slain, Slander, Sleep, Slender, Small, Smile, Solemn, Somerset, Something, Sometime, Sooner, Soothsayer, Sorrow, Sorry, Sought, Souls, Sound, Sovereign, Spare, Speak, Speaks, Speed, Spoke, Sport, Spring, Stain, Stand, State, Steal, Steward, Still, Stomach, Stone, Stood, Storm, Straight, Strange, Strength, Strike, Strong, Struck, Study, Subject, Success, Suddenly, Suffer, Suffolk, Supper, Surely, Surrey, Suspect, Swear, Sweat, Sweet, Swift, Sword, Swore, Sworn, Syracuse, TAILOR, TALBOT, TEMPEST, THIRD, THOMAS, TOWER, TRAIN, TRIBUNES, Taken, Talbot, Tarry, Taste, Taught, Teach, Tears, Tedious, Teeth, Tells, Tender, Thank, Their, Themselves, There, Therefore, Therein, These, Think, Third, Thomas, Those, Though, Thought, Through, Throw, Thrust, Thunder, Together, Tongue, Tonight, Touch, Toward, Tower, Train, Tread, Treason, Tribunes, Triumph, Trouble, Truly, Trumpet, Trust, Truth, Turns, Twice, ULYSSES, UNDER, Ulysses, Uncle, Under, Understand, Undone, Unhappy, Unknown, Unless, Until, Unworthy, Utter, VALENTINE, VENICE, VERSION, VIOLA, Valentine, Valiant, Valour, Vengeance, Venice, Victory, Villain, Viola, Virtue, Visit, WATCH, WIDOW, WINTER, WIVES, WOLSEY, WORKS, WORLD, WRITE, Walls, Warlike, Warrant, Waste, Watch, Water, Weary, Weeds, Weeping, Welcome, Whence, Where, Wherein, Whether, Which, While, Whither, Whole, Whore, Whose, Widow, Willing, Window, Wings, Winter, Wisdom, Withal, Within, Without, Witness, Wives, Wolsey, Woman, Wonder, Works, World, Worse, Worth, Would, Wound, Wounded, Wrath, Write, Written, Wrong, Wrought, YOUNG, Yield, Yonder, Young, Yours, Yourself, Youth, abide, about, above, abroad, absence, abuse, according, account, accuse, acquainted, action, advantage, advice, affairs, affection, affections, afraid, after, afterwards, again, alive, almost, alone, along, already, although, always, ambition, ancient, angel, anger, another, answer, anything, apparel, appear, appears, approach, argument, armour, aside, asleep, assure, attend, attended, authority, avoid, awake, awhile, banish, barren, bastard, battle, beard, bearing, bears, beast, beaten, beauty, because, become, before, beggar, begin, behalf, behind, behold, being, believe, belike, below, benefit, besides, betray, better, between, beyond, birth, bishop, bitter, black, blame, bless, blessing, blest, blind, blood, blows, blunt, blush, bodies, bones, borne, bottom, bought, bound, bounty, brain, brains, brave, breast, breath, breed, brief, bright, bring, broke, brook, brother, brought, brows, burden, buried, burning, business, cannot, captain, cardinal, cares, carry, castle, catch, cause, cease, certain, chain, chair, challenge, chamber, chance, change, charge, charity, chaste, cheek, cheer, chide, chief, child, choice, church, citizen, civil, claim, clear, close, clothes, clouds, clown, college, colour, comes, comfort, coming, command, commanded, commend, commission, commit, common, companion, company, complete, complexion, condition, conduct, confess, conscience, consent, consider, constable, constant, contempt, content, contrary, copies, copyright, could, council, counsel, count, counterfeit, countess, country, courage, course, court, courtesy, cousin, coward, crave, creature, credit, cross, crown, cruel, cunning, curse, custom, dagger, damned, dance, danger, darkness, daughter, deadly, dearest, dearly, death, deeds, defend, degree, delight, deliver, demand, denied, depart, desert, deserve, desire, despair, desperate, despite, device, devil, devise, didst, dinner, discourse, discover, disgrace, dishonour, dispatch, displeasure, disposition, distributed, divine, doctor, doing, doors, double, doubt, drawn, dread, dreadful, dream, dreams, drink, drops, drown, drums, drunk, durst, dwell, dying, early, earth, effect, either, elbow, elder, embrace, emperor, empty, encounter, endure, enemies, enemy, enjoy, enough, enter, entertain, entertainment, entreat, equal, estate, eternal, every, everything, excellent, except, excuse, execution, exeunt, express, faces, faint, fairy, faith, falls, false, familiar, fancy, farewell, farther, fashion, fatal, father, fault, favour, fearful, fears, feast, feeble, fellow, fetch, field, fiend, fierce, fiery, fight, figure, finds, finger, first, flatter, flesh, flies, flight, flood, flourish, flower, flowers, follow, folly, foolish, fools, forbear, forbid, force, forces, forest, forget, former, forth, fortune, forward, fought, found, fourth, frame, freely, fresh, friend, frown, fruit, further, gallant, garden, gates, gaunt, general, gentle, ghost, given, giving, glass, glorious, glory, going, golden, goodness, grace, grant, grave, great, green, greet, grief, grieve, gross, ground, grown, guard, guess, guilty, habit, hands, hanging, hangs, happiness, happy, haste, hateful, having, hazard, heads, health, heard, heart, heaven, heavy, heels, hence, henceforth, hereafter, herself, highness, holds, hollow, honest, horse, hostess, hours, house, humble, humour, hundred, husband, ignorant, image, includes, indeed, infinite, innocent, instant, intend, intent, issue, itself, jealous, jewel, judge, judgment, justice, keeps, kindness, kingdom, kings, knave, kneel, knees, knife, knight, knock, knowing, knowledge, known, knows, labour, ladies, ladyship, lands, large, laugh, lawful, learn, learned, least, leave, leisure, letter, liberty, library, liege, lieutenant, light, limbs, little, lives, living, longer, looks, loose, lords, lordship, lovely, lovers, loves, loving, machine, madness, maiden, maids, maintain, majesty, makes, making, malice, manner, march, marriage, marry, master, match, matter, meaning, means, meant, measure, meeting, memory, merchant, mercy, merit, merry, messenger, midnight, might, mighty, minds, minister, mirth, mischief, misery, mistake, mistress, modest, money, monster, month, morning, morrow, mortal, mother, motion, mouth, murder, murther, music, myself, naked, names, native, natural, nature, needs, neighbour, neither, never, niece, night, noble, noise, nothing, nought, number, nurse, oaths, obedience, object, occasion, offence, offend, offer, office, often, opinion, order, other, others, ourselves, outward, pains, painted, painter, palace, paper, pardon, parted, particular, partly, parts, party, passage, passion, patience, patient, peace, people, perceive, perfect, perhaps, peril, permission, person, personal, picture, piece, pistol, place, plague, plain, plead, please, pleasure, pluck, point, poison, policy, porter, possible, pound, power, practice, praise, prayers, precious, prepare, presence, present, pretty, pride, priest, prince, prison, private, prize, proceed, proclaim, profit, project, prologue, promise, proof, proper, protector, protest, proud, prove, provided, public, purpose, purse, quality, quarrel, queen, question, quick, quiet, quite, quoth, raise, ransom, rascal, rather, readable, ready, realm, reason, receive, regard, reign, remain, remedy, remember, render, repair, repent, report, reputation, request, respect, return, revenge, reverence, revolt, right, rivers, rogue, rotten, rough, round, royal, sacred, safety, saint, satisfied, saying, scarce, scene, scorn, search, season, second, secret, seeing, senator, sense, sentence, servant, serve, service, seven, several, shadow, shake, shall, shame, shape, sharp, shepherd, shine, shore, short, shortly, should, shows, sickness, sight, silence, silver, simple, since, single, sirrah, sister, skill, slain, slander, slave, sleep, slender, small, smell, smile, soldier, solemn, something, sometime, sooner, soothsayer, sorrow, sorry, sought, souls, sound, sovereign, spare, speak, speaks, special, speech, speed, spend, spirit, spite, spoke, sport, spring, staff, stain, stand, stars, state, steal, steel, steward, still, stomach, stone, stood, store, storm, story, straight, strange, street, strength, strike, stroke, strong, struck, study, stuff, subject, substance, success, sudden, suddenly, suffer, summer, supper, surely, suspect, swear, sweat, sweet, swift, sword, swore, sworn, table, tailor, taken, tarry, taste, taught, teach, tears, tedious, teeth, tells, tempest, tender, terms, thank, their, themselves, there, therefore, therein, these, thief, thing, think, third, those, though, thought, thrive, throat, throne, through, throw, thrust, thunder, times, title, together, tongue, tonight, touch, toward, tower, train, traitor, tread, treason, treasure, trial, tribunes, trick, triumph, trouble, truly, trumpet, trust, truth, turns, twice, tyrant, uncle, under, understand, undertake, undone, unhappy, unknown, unless, until, unworthy, utter, valiant, valour, vantage, vengeance, version, victory, villain, violent, virtue, visit, voice, walls, warlike, warrant, waste, watch, water, wealth, weapons, weary, weeds, weeping, weight, welcome, wench, whence, where, wherein, whether, which, while, whither, whole, whore, whose, widow, willing, window, wings, winter, wisdom, witch, withal, within, without, witness, wives, woman, wonder, works, world, worse, worship, worth, would, wound, wounded, wrath, wretch, write, written, wrong, wrought, yield, yonder, young, yours, yourself, youth]
Number of times a word was replace 104716
Time taken to process java.lang.Runtime@42a57993
Memory taken to process 137119728
